Indigo's Corner Cafe opened on the 13th of June and didn't close its doors until the heat death of the universe, except on Mondays. It, understandably, changed management several times and experienced the ups and downs you'd expect of a long running establishment, but it always maintained a furiously loyal customer base. Though each patron appreciated it for their own reasons, it was generally agreed upon amongst patrons that Indigo's Corner Cafe guranteed three things. Mildly above average coffee, subdued music that was only consciously noticeable when conversation lulled, and that you could say with extreme certainty it would be open with a table available on any given day (barring Mondays, obviously). 

This third tenet turned out to be more correct than any patron was ever truly aware of. By pure coincidence, Indigo's Corner Cafe became a universal constant, akin to the speed of light or pi. Nobody noticed, of course, all wrapped up in their own little worlds and searches for meaning, but the universe and her constants never much minded whether they were noticed, they simply *were*.  
  
And Indigo's Corner Cafe certainly was. It served almost three billion customers in total, some you've likely heard of! Three presidents, nineteen conquerors, forty-one explorers, fifty-four famous artists, seven million successful artists, and two-hundred and thirty-seven million lovers, if you round down. All customers were provided with warm service that waned as waiters' shifts grew long, and were greeted and gently accused by a carved wooden sign by the door:  
  
"The coffee is okay, but you're not here for the coffee are you"